**\[title\]The Portrait of a Hellenistic Ruler in the** **National
Museum of Iran**

\[author\]Gunvor Lindström

\[affiliation\]Deutsches Archäeologisches Institut, Berlin

**\[A-head\]Abstract **

\[abstract\]

The portrait of a Hellenistic ruler in the National Museum of Iran (inv.
2477) is the most prominent archaeological testimony of the Hellenistic
presence in Iran. It shows the spread of Hellenistic large-scale
sculpture in the regions east of the Tigris River, of which there is
otherwise very little evidence. Furthermore, it is one of the few
preserved original Hellenistic large-scale bronzes. Nevertheless, this
extraordinary piece of art is rarely illustrated in handbooks on
Hellenistic sculpture or ruler portraits and only a few specialists are
familiar with this bronze. The head represents a ruler, likely a king of
the Seleucid dynasty, which ruled Iran in the third and second centuries
BC. But due to the portrait’s intense deformation the ruler represented
could not be identified until now. In August 2015 a project was started
with the aim of reconstructing the original facial features. Although
this aim has not been achieved, the investigations at the National
Museum of Iran have already yielded extraordinary results.

**\[A-head\]Discovery in 1935 in Ancient Elymais**

\[main text\]

The portrait head of a Hellenistic ruler (**fig. 22.1**) was discovered
more than eighty years ago in Kal-e Chendar in the valley of Shami,
north of Izeh in present-day Khuzistan (ancient Elymais). It is often
stated that Sir Aurel Stein (1862–1943), the famous Hungaro-British
explorer, excavated the portrait. In fact, it was found accidently in
the course of construction work, shortly before Stein arrived at the
site.[^1] In 1935 local semi-nomadic Bakhtiaris had been obliged to
settle down, and as they dug the foundations for a dwelling they
discovered fragments of ancient statues made of bronze and marble. Of
these the so-called Parthian nobleman—a nearly complete statue of a man
in Parthian dress, some 2 meters (6 1/2 ft.) high—is the most
well-known.[^2] When the military governor of the district came to learn
of the discoveries, he ordered that the site be left undisturbed and
transported all the finds to his house at Malamir (modern Izeh). About
six months later, Stein visited the region during his Fourth Expedition
into Iran. He saw the finds at the governor’s house, took some
photographs of the statues, and decided to visit the place of their
discovery.

**\[A-head\]Excavations by Sir Aurel Stein in 1936**

Stein excavated at Kal-e Chendar for six days between January 28 and
February 3, 1936.[^3] During this period, he conducted a brief survey of
the whole site and opened a trench in the area where the sculptures were
found. He found the remains of a quadrangular enclosure, about 12.5 by
23.5 meters (41 x 77 ft.), with an altar built of burnt bricks in the
center. These suggested to Stein a shrine with veranda-like halls along
the walls and a central area left open to the sky. The structural
remains are documented in a sketch plan, with marks for the findspots of
the objects recovered during the archaeological investigations and for
the earlier excavated sculptural fragments, as reported by the local
villagers.[^4] Altogether, fragments of seven large-scale bronze
sculptures and six smaller figures of bronze and marble were found.
Based on the presumed dating of the sculptures, Stein wrote, “it has
proved a shrine where local worship, continued into Parthian times, had
in a syncretistic fashion common to the Near East combined Hellenistic
cult of Greek divinities with the worship of deified royal personages,
perhaps from Alexander the Great down to Iranian chiefs for us
nameless.”[^5]

**\[A-head\]Recent Investigations at Kal-e Chendar by the
Iranian-Italian mission**

Despite these extraordinary discoveries, Kal-e Chendar soon fell into
oblivion, at least among archaeologists.[^6] However, in 2012 the
Iranian-Italian Joint Expedition in Khuzistan carried out a new survey
and started archaeological investigations.[^7] According to their
preliminary results, the site consisted of at least three monumental
terraces. The photographs taken by Stein in 1936 enabled the
archaeologists to determine the approximate spot where Stein excavated,
which is now covered over and cultivated. The Stein trench is at a
peripheral part of the largest terrace, which extends for more than
6,000 square meters (65,000 sq. ft.). Therefore, the discovered
enclosure was hardly the main building of the sanctuary. Rather, the
focal point was a large temple, which is attested so far only by column
drums and blocks of ancient masonry, scattered on the surface or re-used
in the walls of modern houses. The sculptures found in 1935 and 1936
most likely belong to the presumed temple, and their number and quality
indicate that it must have been one of the most renowned religious
places of ancient Elymais. Given the style and date of the ruler
portrait in question, the sanctuary must have been established already
in Hellenistic times.

**\[A-head\]The Head**

The head was found in two pieces, obviously severed in antiquity. The
first published photo shows both fragments lying on their sides,
juxtaposed (**fig. 22.2**). Although Stein noted that the two parts fit
together, the side views of the faces differ sufficiently that some
scholars assume that they represent two different portraits.[^8] In any
case, for aesthetic and museum reasons the two parts were fixed together
sometime in the 1960s and the join was covered with epoxy. The fragments
comprise a clean-shaven face with both ears, parts of the hair, and the
front part of the neck, which is bent forward. The upper and posterior
parts of the head were detached from the face and are not preserved.[^9]
Although there is a deep dent in the right cheek, the appearance of the
right side is still vigorous. The left side is quite different: the
jawline is bent outward forming a chubby cheek (see fig. 22.5). The
frontal view shows that the entire face is bent toward the right side
along the bridge of the nose. All in all, the facial features are so
distorted that it is impossible to identify the ruler.

**\[A-head\]Proposed Identifications**

Nevertheless, numerous attempts have been made to identify the sitter.
The size and the quality of the head indicate that it is a portrait of a
ruler. And because it was discovered in Iran it is most probably a king
of the Seleucid dynasty, which ruled the Hellenistic East until the
Parthian invasion of 141 BC. Several identifications have been proposed
from Alexander the Great[^10] to Antiochus I and II or Seleucus II,[^11]
to Antiochus III,[^12] Antiochus IV,[^13] and Antiochus VII.[^14] It has
even been proposed that the head represents Kamnaskires I,[^15] the
first king of a local Elymaean dynasty ruling under Parthian domination
from the middle of the second century BC. But most of these
identifications are merely speculations, based on historical
considerations rather than on a comparison with the coin portraits of
the respective kings. Because of the strong deformation of the face,
some scholars admit that it is difficult or even impossible to identify
the ruler.[^16] So despite Stein’s hope that expert examination of the
head might lead to a solid identification, the depicted ruler even today
is still unknown.[^17]

**\[A-head\]The Deliberate Breakage of the Head**

As mentioned above, the head was broken into two pieces, and not merely
for the purpose of melting down the metal. A photograph taken by Stein,
preserved in the archives of the British Library and published here for
the first time (**fig. 22.3**), shows the assembled parts of the head
before restoration. The marks of a chisel are visible at the left side
of the forehead (**fig. 22.4**). From there, the cut runs along the
bridge of the nose to the chin. This is not the easiest line along which
to divide a bronze head, therefore a non-pragmatic purpose of the
partition has to be considered. Moreover, the dent in the right cheek
was the result of several heavy blows with an edged tool, presumably a
stone. The entire nose is pushed to the right side of the face,
compressing the right side of the nose and bulging out the left cheek.
The brutality of the actions and the deliberate distortion is obvious.
Presumably the damage is a form of *damnatio memoriae* and the
performers aimed to destroy the image and the memory of the ruler.

**\[A-head\]A First Reconstruction**

A first attempt to reconstruct the original features of the portrait was
made soon after its discovery. This is attested only by a photograph
taken by Stein in 1937, which is reproduced in Michael Rostovtzeff’s
*The* *Social and Economic History of the Hellenistic World*
(Rostovtzeff 1941). The caption reads: “photograph of a lead cast
supplied by Sir Aurel Stein” and “*pro tempore* in the British
Museum.”[^18] This label seems surprising, because the piece of art was
found in Iran and has long since been in the National Museum of Iran.
But indeed the head made a short trip to London. Because Stein was a
famous explorer, the Iranian authorities allowed him temporarily to send
all finds from his expedition to the British Museum for
examination.[^19] During its time in London, the sculptor Frank Bowcher
made a piece mold of the head and produced a lead cast.[^20] The
sculptor added the eye, squeezed out the depression in the right cheek,
and put some parts of the head back in place, such as the neck.[^21]
Unfortunately, this reconstruction could not be traced in the British
Museum or in any other collection in the United Kingdom.

**The Intended Reconstruction of the Original Features of the Head**

The reconstruction of the original features of the Hellenistic ruler has
been attempted again in a project started in August 2015. Based upon a
series of digital images and by means of photogrammetry, a
three-dimensional state model was created (**fig. 22.5**).[^22] This
model, in turn, will serve to reconstruct the original physiognomy of
the face by means of computer animation. For example, relatively
well-preserved sections such as the upper cheek and eye of the right
side of the face can be cut out, mirrored, and inserted on the other
side of the head. Dents and bulges can be straightened, and the cracks
joined. But it is still a work in progress. The reconstructed portrait
should enable comparison to coin portraits of the Seleucid kings. Of
course, such an approach has to consider the problems particular to
comparison between a three-dimensional representation to two-dimensional
coin designs. Nevertheless, we hope be able to identify the sitter of
the bronze portrait in the National Museum of Iran.

**\[A-head\]Other Remains of the Sculpture**

The photos from the Stein archive show further pieces of bronze
sculpture, most likely belonging to the same sculpture as the bronze
head in question. Some pieces were already illustrated in Stein’s
report, but others have not been published until now. Unlike Stein’s
plates, the photos from the archive provide an exact size scale. Five
fragments show similar proportions, which are in turn in accordance with
the scale of the head. Using the photos from the archives, colleagues at
the National Museum of Iran easily identified the requested pieces, some
of which were on display in the Museum halls and others located in
storage. Gathered together for the first time, it turned out that three
fragments fit together.[^23] They form a raised left arm, the fingers in
the pose of grasping a long object, perhaps a spear (**fig. 22.6**).
Being significantly larger than the arm of an average-size European, the
bronze arm indicates a sculpture slightly more than two meters (6 1/2
feet) tall. The inner surface of the sculptural fragment reveals details
that are related to the casting process: two parallel raised lines with
soft surfaces indicate a wax-to-wax join (**fig. 22.7**). Apparently two
halves of a master mold met there, each lined with rectangular-cut wax
sheets, and the seam between these sheets was covered with a wax strip.
Fragments of a bare left leg from below the knee to above the ankle and
of a right arm show the same technological features.[^24] Therefore,
they most likely belong to the same sculpture.[^25]

**Reconstruction of the Statue Type**

The preserved bronze fragments represent less than twenty percent of the
statue. However, the bare limbs suggest that it was an undraped male.
And with the position of the arm one can infer a statue with a raised
arm, leaning on a spear (**fig. 22.8**). The princely pose and the size
of the sculpture indicate that it represented a ruler, even if a diadem
is not preserved.

Trudy S. Kawami (1987) noted that “the presence of such an important
work so far from a major city is difficult to explain.”[^26] However,
judging from the first results of the Iranian-Italian excavations at
Kal-e Chendar, the sculpture was erected at one of the most important
religious places of ancient Elymais. From a Mediterranean point of view,
the quality and “Greekness” of the reassembled statue may cause
surprise, especially given its discovery in Iran. However, this just
points out our limited knowledge of Hellenism in the regions east of the
Tigris River.

\[A-head\]Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Fritz Thyssen Stiftung. My thanks go also
to Dr. Jebrael Nokandeh, the director of the National Museum of Iran,
who enabled the investigations, and to the entire museum staff,
especially Firouzeh Sepidnameh (head of the Exhibition Department) and
Masoumeh Ahmadi (International Affairs). Further thanks go to Ursula
Sims-Williams, who drew my attention to the material of the Stein
archives in the British Museum.

\[A-head\]Bibliography

\[bibliography\]

Berghe 1959

Berghe, L. vanden 1959. *Archéologie de l’Iran ancien*. Leiden: E. J.
Brill.

Boyce and Grenet 1991

Boyce, M., and F. Grenet, 1991. *A History of Zoroastrianism*. Vol. 3:
*Zoroastrianism under Macedonian and Roman Rule*. Leiden: E. J. Brill.

Canepa 2015

Canepa, M. 2015. “Bronze Sculpture in the Hellenistic East.” In *Power
and Pathos: Bronze Sculpture of the Hellenistic World*, ed. J. M.
Daehner and K. Lapatin, 83–93. Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum.

Colledge 1967

Colledge, M. A. R. 1967. *The Parthians*. London: Thames & Hudson.

Colledge 1977

Colledge, M. A. R. 1977. *Parthian Art.* London: Paul Elek.

Colledge 1984

Colledge, M. A. R. 1984. “The Seleucid Kingdom.” In *The Cambridge
Ancient History: Plates to Volume VII, Part 1: The Hellenistic World to
the Coming of the Romans*, ed. R. Ling, 21–22. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Colledge 1987

Colledge, M. A. R. 1987. “Greek and Non-Greek Interaction in the Art and
Architecture of the Hellenistic East.” In *Hellenism in the East: The
Interaction of Greek and Non-Greek Civilizations from Syria to Central
Asia after Alexander*, ed. A. Kuhrt and S. Sherwin-White, 134–62.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Eddy 1961

Eddy, S. F. 1961. *The King is Dead: Studies in the Near Eastern
Resistance to Hellenism, 334–31 B.C*. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.

Fischer 1970

Fischer, T. 1970. “Untersuchungen zum Partherkrieg Antiochos’ VII. ”
Ph.D. diss. Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen.

Fleischer 1991

Fleischer, R. 1991. *Studien zur Seleukidischen Kunst*, vol. 1. Mainz am
Rhein: Philipp von Zabern.

Fleischer 2000

Fleischer, R. 2000. “Portraitkopf eines Königs.” In *7000 Jahre
persische Kunst: Meisterwerke aus dem Iranischen Nationalmuseum in
Teheran*, ed. W. Seipel, 227, no. 133. Milan: Skira, and Vienna:
Kunsthistorisches Museum.

Fleischer 2016

Fleischer, R. 2016. “Der hellenistische Königskopf aus Šamī, Iran.“ In
*Man kann es sich nicht prächtig genug vorstellen! Festschrift für
Dieter Salzmann zum 65. Geburtstag*, ed. H.-H. Nieswandt and H.
Schwarzer, vol. I, 269–86, pls. 30–31. Marsberg: Scriptorium.

Ghirshman 1954

Ghirshman, R. 1954. *Iran, from the Earliest Times to the Islamic
Conquest*. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books.

Ghirshman 1962

Ghirshman, R. 1962. *Iran: Parther und Sasaniden.* Munich: C. H. Beck.

Ghirshman 1976

Ghirshman, R. 1976. *Les terrasses sacrées de Bard-è Néchandeh et
Masjid-i Sulaiman: L’Iran du sud-ouest du VIIIe s. av. n. ère au Ve s.
de n. ère*. Mémoires de la Délégation archéologique en Iran 45. Leiden
and Paris: E. J. Brill.

Godard 1962

Godard, A. 1962. *L’art de l’Iran.* Paris: Arthaud.

Godard 1937

Godard, A. 1937. “Les statues parthes de Shami.” *Athar-é Iran* 2:
285–305.

Herrmann 1977

Herrmann, G. 1977. *The Iranian Revival*. Oxford: Elsevier-Phaidon.

Houghton 1989

Houghton, A. 1989. “A Victory Coin and the Parthian Wars of Antiochus
VII.” In *Proceedings of the 10th International Congress of Numismatics,
London 1986*, ed. I. A. Caradice, 65. London: International Association
of Professional Numismatists.

Kawami 1987

Kawami, T. S. 1987. *Monumental Art of the Parthian Period in Iran.*
Acta Iranica 26. Textes et Mémoirs (3rd ser.) 13. Leiden: E. J. Brill.

Kyrieleis 1980

Kyrieleis, H. 1980. *Ein Bildnis des Königs Antiochos IV. von Syrien*.
Berliner Winckelmann-Programm 127. Berlin: W. de Gruyter.

Lukonin 1967

Lukonin, V. G. 1967. *Persien*, vol. 2. Munich: Nagel.

Mathiesen 1992

Mathiesen, H. E. 1992. *Sculpture in the Parthian Empire: A Study in
Chronology*. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.

Messina and Mehr Kian 2014

Messina, V., and J. Mehr Kian. 2014. “Return to Shami: Preliminary
Survey of the Iranian-Italian Joint Expedition in Khuzestan at Kal-e
Chendar.” *Iran* 52: 65–77.

Mørkholm 1963

Mørkholm, O. 1963. *Studies in the Coinage of Antiochus IV of Syria*.
Copenhagen: Munksgaard.

Mussche 1955–56

Mussche, H. F. 1955–56. “De Portretten de Seleuciden.“ *Gentse Bijdragen
tot de Kunstgeschiedenis* 16: 55–69.

Parlasca 1991

Parlasca, K. 1991. “Zur hellenistischen Plastik im Vorderen Orient.“ In
[*O ελληνισμóς στην Aνατoλή: Πρακτικά A’ Διεθνoύς Aρχαιoλoγικoύ
Συνεδρίoυ, Δελφoί 6–9 Noεμβρίoυ
1986*](http://aldai.ub.hu-berlin.de:80/F/B4HCU4BQYUQL1IN4YS5N3DGGE5KC218M994FD46424N4XYFY9R-02145?func=direct&local_base=DAI01&doc_number=000296044),
453–65. Athens: European Cultural Center Delphi

Picard 1939

Picard, C. 1939. “Courrier de l’art antique.” *Gazette des beaux arts*
(Avril 1939): 201–34.

Porada 1962

Porada, E. 1962. *Alt-Iran: Die Kunst in vorislamischer Zeit*.
Baden-Baden: Holle.

Richter 1965

Richter, G. M. A. 1965. *The Portraits of the Greeks*. London: Phaidon.

Rostovtzeff 1941

Rostovtzeff, M. 1941. *The Social and Economic History of the
Hellenistic World*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Sarkosh Curtis and Pazooki 2004

Sarkosh Curtis, V. and N. Pazooki. 2004. “Aurel Stein and Bahmna Karimi
on Old Routes of Western Iran.” In *Sir Aurel Stein: Proceedings of the
British Museum Study Day, 23 March 2002*, ed. H. Wang, 23–28. British
Museum Occasional Paper 142. London: The Trustees of the British Museum.

Schippmann 1971

Schippmann, K. 1971. *Die iranischen Feuerheiligtümer*.
Religionsgeschichtliche Versuche und Vorarbeiten 31. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter.

Sherwin-White 1984

Sherwin-White, S. M. 1984. “Shami, the Seleucids and Dynastic Cult: A
Note.” *Iran* 22: 160–61.

Sims-Williams 2004

Sims-Williams, U. 2004. “New Data Relating to Aurel Stein’s Expeditions
to Iran: Correspondence with Fred Andrews, 1936–37.” In *Sir Aurel
Stein: Proceedings of the British Museum Study Day, 23 March 2002*, ed.
H. Wang, 23–28. British Museum Occasional Paper 142. London: The
Trustees of the British Museum.

Smith 1988

Smith, R. R. R. 1988. *Hellenistic Royal Portraits*. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

Smith 1991

Smith, R. R. R. 1991. *Hellenistic Sculpture: A Handbook*. London:
Thames & Hudson.

Stein 1936

Stein, A. 1936. “Ancient Ways in Iran: A Fourth Journey I: Traces of
Alexander the Great.” *The Times* (London) (July 6, 1936): 15–16.

Stein 1938

Stein, A. 1938. “An Archaeological Journey in Western Iran.” *The
Geographical Journal* 42: 313–42.

Stein 1940

Stein, A. 1940. *Old Routes of Western Īrān: Narrative of an
Archaeological Journey Carried Out and Recorded by Sir Aurel Stein,
K.C.I.E.* London: MacMillan and Co.

Stewart 1990

Stewart, A. 1990. *Greek Sculpture: An Exploration*. 2 vols. New Haven
and London: Yale University Press.

[^1]: The account of the discovery follows the report by Stein 1938 and
    1940.

[^2]: Canepa 2015, 85–87, fig. 6.4.

[^3]: First reports are Stein 1936 and 1938. The final report is
    included in Stein 1940, 130–35, 141–58.

[^4]: Stein 1940, 145, plan II.

[^5]: Stein 1940, 155.

[^6]: The Director of the Iranian Archaeological Services, André Godard,
    did a short investigation at the site in 1937, but the results are
    not published (Ghirshman 1976, 237). The structures recovered by
    Stein were already spoiled when the site was visited in 1968 by
    Klaus Schippmann (1971, 230) and in 1971 by Roman Ghirshman
    (Ghirshman 1976, 236).

[^7]: Messina and Mehr Kian 2014.

[^8]: Ghirshman 1962, 21 (“a seleucid king and his wife”); Colledge
    1967, 156, 221 (“perhaps Antiochus IV and his queen”); idem. 1987,
    152 (“a female and a male portrait head”); Parlasca 1991, 465 (“two
    bronze heads”); Fischer 1970, 53, n. 111 (“Antiochus VII and his son
    Seleucus”). Fleischer (2016) considered the present state of the
    head to be a modern pastiche of two different ancient fragments. But
    after viewing the image discovered during the present investigation
    (fig. 22.3), he was convinced that they belong together (personal
    communication).

[^9]: Stein (1940, 151 plate 5.1) believed a top part of a bronze head
    with a diadem to belong to the face. Because the fragment could not
    be traced in the National Museum of Iran, a direct comparison to the
    face was not possible. In any case, the dissimilarities in the style
    of the hair and possible overlaps above the left temple suggest that
    the pieces do not belong together.

[^10]: Stein 1940, 151 (following a suggestion by the numismatist George
    F. Hill); Colledge 1977, 82; idem. 1984, 22.

[^11]: Mørkholm 1963, 67.

[^12]: Herrmann 1977, 39.

[^13]: Rostovtzeff 1941, 66, plate 10.1; Ghirshman 1954, 236, 278, plate
    29b; idem. 1962, 20–21; 1976, 237; Mussche 1955–56, 61; vanden
    Berghe 1959, 64, plate 94c; Eddy 1961, 146; Richter 1965, 271;
    Porada 1962, 180, fig. 89; Lukonin 1967, plate 13; Colledge 1967,
    156, 221; idem. 1977, 82; idem. 1984, 22; Herrmann 1977, 39;
    Parlasca 1991, 465. Sherwin-White (1984, 160) rules out an
    identification as Antiochus IV.

[^14]: Fischer 1970, 53 n. 111; Houghton 1989; Smith 1988, 81, 119, 173;
    idem. 1991, 226; Stewart 1990, 1: 218; 2: fig. 768.

[^15]: Godard 1962, 183. Canepa (2015, 85) and, based on historical
    considerations, Boyce and Grenet (1991, 43) suggest a king of a
    local Elymaean dynasty.

[^16]: Identifications considered too problematic by Kyrieleis 1980, 22
    n. 28; Kawami 1987, 28; Boyce and Grenet 1991, 42–43
    (“identifications of the mask are risky”); Fleischer 1991, 105–106;
    Fleischer 2000; Fleischer 2016; Mathiesen 1992, 88–89.

[^17]: Stein 1938, 325.

[^18]: Rostovtzeff 1941, plate 10.1. The cast was already illustrated by
    Stein (1938, fig. 9) and Picard (1939, fig. 35) with no reference
    that it is a reconstruction.

[^19]: Stein 1940, XIV; Sarkosh Curtis and Pazooki 2004, 24;
    Sims-Williams 2004, 1. Stein incorporated several objects into his
    own findings, even though they were discovered by the locals. In
    1938 these objects, including the bronze head, were returned to
    Tehran.

[^20]: This procedure is documented only in correspondence between Stein
    and Fred Andrews, who supervised the examinations at the British
    Museum. The letters are published in extracts by Sims-Williams 2004.

[^21]: If compared with the corresponding view of the head, the
    reconstruction is quite reliable, even if Boyce and Grenet (1991,
    43) state that important details appear to have been completed from
    imagination.

[^22]: The photogrammetry and the creation of the state model were made
    by Prof. Thomas Kersten and Dr. Maren Lindstaedt of the
    Photogrammetry & Laserscanning Lab of the HafenCity University in
    Hamburg. They will also conduct the technical implementation of the
    reconstruction.

[^23]: National Museum of Iran, inv. 2471: a hand considered by Stein
    (1940, 151 plate 5.4) to belong to a colossal sculpture; inv. 2874:
    a large part of the arm not mentioned by Stein but illustrated by
    Godard (1937, fig. 126); inv. 2473: a fragment of the lower arm
    mentioned by neither Stein nor Godard.

[^24]: National Museum of Iran, inv. 2478, the leg: Stein 1940, 151
    plate 5.6; inv. 2470: a piece of the right arm mentioned by neither
    Stein nor Godard.

[^25]: Other remains of bronze sculpture from Kal-e Chendar, which were
    examined within the project, do not show the straight elevated lines
    on the interior surface.

[^26]: Kawami 1987, 28.
